I, STEPHEN DONNELLY, Minister for Health, in exercise of the powers conferred on me by sections 5 and 31A (inserted by section 10 of the Health (Preservation and Protection and other Emergency Measures in the Public Interest) Act 2020 (No. 1 of 2020)) of the Health Act 1947 (No. 28 of 1947) and -

(a) having regard to the immediate, exceptional and manifest risk posed to human life and public health by the spread of Covid-19 and to the matters specified in subsection (2) of section 31A, and

(b) having consulted with the Minister for Transport, the Minister for Business, Enterprise and Innovation, the Minister for Finance, the Minister for Justice and Equality, and the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media,

hereby make the following regulations:

PART 1

Preliminary and General

Citation and Commencement

1. (1) These Regulations may be cited as the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A - Temporary Restrictions) (Covid-19) (No. 7) Regulations 2020.

(2) These Regulations, other than Regulations 15(3) and 16, shall come into operation on the 18th day of October 2020.

(3) Regulations 15(3) and 16 shall come into operation on the 19th day of October 2020.

Operation of Regulations

2. These Regulations shall remain in operation until the 9th day of November 2020.

Revocation

3. The Health Act 1947 (Section 31A - Temporary Restrictions) (Covid-19) (No. 6) Regulations 2020 ( S.I. No. 413 of 2020 ) are revoked.

Interpretation

4. (1) In these Regulations -

“Act of 1947” means the Health Act 1947 (No. 28 of 1947);

“Act of 2001” means the Local Government Act 2001 (No. 37 of 2001);

“applicable person” means a person whose place of residence is located within a relevant geographical location;

“child” means a person who has not attained the age of 18 years;

“club” means a club registered under the Registration of Clubs Acts 1904 to 2008;

“county” has the same meaning as it has in section 10 (amended by section 12 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014 (No. 1 of 2014)) of the Act of 2001, being a Local Government Area that is listed as a County in Schedule 5 to the Act of 2001;

“County of Dublin” shall be construed in accordance with paragraph (2);

“county of residence”, in relation to an applicable person, means the county in which his or her place of residence is situated;

“essential retail outlet” means a retail outlet specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3;

“essential service” means a service specified in Part 2 of Schedule 3.

“licence”, in relation to premises, means a licence for the sale by retail of intoxicating liquor for consumption on or off the premises whether granted on production or without production of a certificate of the Circuit Court or District Court;

“necessary person” means, in relation to a sporting event, any person whose presence at the event is necessary for the event to take place, and includes -

(a) a person referred to in Regulation 9(2)(b) who is participating in the sporting event,

(b) a member of staff of Sport Ireland or a member of staff of the relevant sporting body of an athlete or competitor participating in the event,

(c) a coach or a trainer connected to the event,

(d) medical personnel, including such personnel conducting doping testing, whose presence is required at the event,

(e) a person who attends the event in order to ensure that it is conducted in accordance with the rules of the sport,

(f) a person engaged by the organiser of the sporting event as a steward, whether in a remunerated or voluntary capacity, to implement crowd control, compliance with public health guidance and other safety measures,

(g) a person whose attendance at the event is necessary for it to be reported, recorded or broadcast,

(h) a person who is a parent or guardian of a person who -

(i) is participating in the event, and

(ii) is a child,

(i) a person accompanying a person who is participating in the event, where that person normally requires assistance in carrying out his or her daily activities, or

(j) a person providing necessary technical, administrative, logistical or other professional services to a person described in any of subparagraphs (a) to (i);

“place of residence” means -

(a) in relation to a person who is ordinarily resident in the State -

(i) the home in which the person ordinarily resides, or

(ii) if the person does not have a home, such other premises, if any, at which he or she is currently residing, whether on a permanent or temporary basis, or

(b) in relation to a person who is not ordinarily resident in the State, the premises in the State, if any, at which he or she is currently residing, whether on a permanent or temporary basis;

“premises” includes part of any premises;

“premises controller” means -

(a) in relation to premises the subject of a licence, the holder of the licence, and

(b) in relation to the premises of a club, every person whose name is entered in the register of clubs as an official or member of its committee of management or governing body at the material time;

“relevant county” means a county that is -

(a) listed in Schedule 1, and

(b) located in a relevant geographical location;

“relevant geographical location” means a geographical location to which an affected areas order applies;

“relevant event” means an event held, or to be held, for social, recreational, exercise, cultural, entertainment or community reasons, but does not include -

(a) an event to be held in a private dwelling,

(b) a wedding reception,

(c) a sporting event, or

(d) a training event;

“relevant person” means an applicable person whose place of residence is located within a relevant county;

“specified person”, in relation to any premises, means -

(a) the premises controller of the premises,

(b) the occupier of the premises,

(c) the manager of the premises, or

(d) any other person for the time being in charge of the premises;

“sporting event” means an event to be held in a location other than in a private dwelling that is -

(a) to be held wholly or partly for competitive sport reasons, regardless of the nature of the sport or the competitive standard in question,

(b) organised under the structure of, licenced by, or otherwise authorised by -

(i) a national governing body of the sport in question, or

(ii) a school, university or higher education institution, and

(c) not a training event;

“substantial meal” means a meal -

(a) such as might be expected to be served as a main midday or main evening meal or as a main course at either such meal, and

(b) that is of a kind, having regard to all the circumstances, for which it would be reasonable to charge a sum that is not less than €9;

“training event” means an event -

(a) to be held in preparation for a sporting event, and

(b) that is supervised by a member of staff of Sport Ireland, a coach or a trainer;

“vulnerable person” means -

(a) a person who normally requires assistance in carrying out his or her daily activities,

(b) a person who, although not normally requiring assistance in carrying out his or her daily activities, requires such assistance because he or she is -

(i) particularly susceptible to the risk posed to health by Covid-19, or

(ii) not in a position to leave his or her place of residence due to reasons related to the spread of Covid-19 or otherwise,

or

(c) a child.

(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, a group of Local Government Areas specified in one of the following subparagraphs shall be deemed to be a single county:

(a) Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown, Fingal, South Dublin and Dublin City (together referred to in these Regulations as the “County of Dublin”);

(b) Cork and Cork City;

(c) Galway and Galway City.

Part 2

Temporary restrictions – national measures

Restrictions of movement of applicable persons in relation to travel from county of residence

5. (1) Subject to Regulation 13 and paragraph (2), an applicable person shall not travel from his or her county of residence to another county or to a state other than the State without reasonable excuse.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of what constitutes a reasonable excuse for the purposes of paragraph (1), a reasonable excuse for travelling includes travelling in order to -

(a) work, comply with a contract of employment or contract for services, or otherwise engage in work or employment, where, in all the circumstances, it is not practicable to so work, comply or engage in the person’s place of residence,

(b) without prejudice to the generality of subparagraph (a) -

(i) provide services to, or perform the functions of, an office holder appointed under any enactment or under the Constitution, or a member of either House of the Oireachtas, the European Parliament or a local authority, or

(ii) provide services essential to the functioning of diplomatic missions and consular posts in the State,

(c) farm, carry out agricultural activities, or assist in farming or carrying out agricultural activities,

(d) attend, for educational reasons -

(i) a primary or secondary school, or

(ii) a university, higher education institution or other education and training facility to the extent that it is necessary for such educational reasons to attend in person,

(e) to accompany to a school referred to in subparagraph (d)(i), or to a university, higher education institution or other education and training facility referred to in subparagraph (d)(ii), any other person residing with the person, or a vulnerable person,

(f) access créche or other childcare facilities,

(g) attend a medical or dental appointment, or accompany, to such an appointment, any other person residing with the person, or a vulnerable person,

(h) seek essential medical, health or dental assistance for the person, for any other person residing with the person, or for a vulnerable person,

(i) donate blood or accompany any other person residing with the person to donate blood,

(j) seek veterinary assistance,

(k) attend to vital family matters (including providing care to vulnerable persons),

(l) attend a funeral,

(m) fulfil a legal obligation (including attending court, satisfying bail conditions, or participating in ongoing legal proceedings), attend a court office where required, initiate emergency legal proceedings or execute essential legal documents,

(n) if the person is a parent or guardian of a child, or a person having a right of access to a child, give effect to arrangements for access to the child by -

(i) the person, or

(ii) another person who is -

(I) a parent or guardian of the child, or

(II) a person having a right of access to the child,

(o) in the case of a minister of religion or priest (or any equivalent thereof in any religion) -

(i) lead worship or services remotely through the use of information and communications technology,

(ii) minister to the sick, or

(iii) conduct funeral or wedding services,

(p) move to another residence where, in all the circumstances of the case, such movement is reasonably necessary,

(q) return to the person’s place of residence,

(r) where the person is not ordinarily resident in the State, leave the State,

(s) provide emergency assistance, avoid injury or illness, or escape a risk of harm, whether to the person or to another person,

(t) go to an essential retail outlet for the purpose of obtaining items (including food, beverages, fuel, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, essential items for the health and welfare of animals, or supplies for the essential upkeep and functioning of the person’s place of residence), or accessing services provided in the outlet, for the applicable person or any other person residing in the person’s place of residence, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence,

(u) go to an essential retail outlet for the purpose of obtaining items (including food, beverages, fuel, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, essential items for the health and welfare of animals, or supplies for the essential upkeep and functioning of the place of residence of a vulnerable person), or accessing services provided in the outlet, for a vulnerable person, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence, or

(v) access an essential service, or assist any other person residing in the person’s place of residence, or a vulnerable person, to access an essential service, where the access is immediately required and the person, other person residing in the relevant residence or vulnerable person, as the case may be, cannot access the service concerned from the place of residence, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence.

Restrictions on events in private dwellings

6. (1) Subject to Regulation 14, a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, an event to be held in a private dwelling in a relevant geographical location other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) Subject to paragraph (3), a person may organise, or cause to be organised, an event to be held in a private dwelling in a relevant geographical location for social or recreational reasons where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the persons attending, or proposed to attend, the event (for whatever reason) reside in the private dwelling.

(3) For the purposes of paragraph (2), where the event is attended by -

(a) a child, and

(b) a parent or guardian of such child, who does not ordinarily reside with that child,

the parent or guardian, as the case may be, and the child shall be deemed to reside in the private dwelling.

Restrictions on certain events and funerals

7. (1) Subject to Regulation 15, a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a relevant event in a relevant geographical location, other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise a relevant event in a relevant geographical location where -

(a) the event takes place only outdoors and,

(b) the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the event is attended, or proposed to be attended, by no more than 15 persons.

(3) A person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a funeral to be held in a relevant geographical location other than where the number of people, excluding a minister of religion or priest (or any equivalent thereof in any religion), attending the funeral does not exceed 25.

(4) Paragraph (1) is a penal provision for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(5) For the purposes of this Regulation, in reckoning the number of persons attending a relevant event, no account shall be taken of persons so attending in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services.

Wedding Receptions

8. (1) Subject to Regulation 16, a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a wedding reception in a relevant geographical location other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise, or cause to be organised, a wedding reception in a relevant geographical location in a premises other than a private dwelling where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the maximum number of persons attending, or proposed to attend, the wedding reception does not exceed 25 persons.

(3) For the purposes of this Regulation, in reckoning the number of persons attending a wedding reception, no account shall be taken of –

(a) the persons getting married, or

(b) persons so attending in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services.

Restrictions on sporting events

9. (1) Subject to Regulation 17 and paragraph (2), a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a sporting event in a relevant geographical location.

(2) A person may organise, or cause to be organised, a sporting event in a relevant geographical location where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that -

(a) the event is attended, or proposed to be attended, only by necessary persons, and

(b) every person participating in the event -

(i) is in receipt of financial support provided by Sport Ireland under the scheme commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland International Carding Scheme,

(ii) competes at a senior level and is a participant in a high performance training programme of the national governing body of the sport, which body receives, from Sport Ireland, financial support commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland High Performance Programme Funding,

(iii) is a member of an inter-county team, at senior, under 20 or minor level, in a competition organised by the organisations commonly known and referred to as the Gaelic Athletic Association, the Ladies Gaelic Football Association or the Camogie Association,

(iv) is a professional sportsperson who receives payment for training and playing sport under a contract of employment with a soccer club or the rugby football organisation commonly known and referred to as the Irish Rugby Football Union,

(v) is involved in the training and preparation of racehorses for events held under the authority of Horse Racing Ireland, or

(vi) is involved in the training and preparation of greyhounds for events held under the authority of Rásaíocht Con Éireann.

Restrictions on training events

10. (1) Subject to Regulation 18 and paragraph (3), a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a training event in a relevant geographical location other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise a training event in a relevant geographical location where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that -

(a) other persons attending at, or otherwise participating in, the training event are organised into groups of no more than 15 persons,

(b) a group referred to in subparagraph (a), and any person forming part of such a group, is not permitted to commingle, associate with, or otherwise come into physical contact with, another such group or any other person forming part of such other group, and

(c) the training event is held outdoors.

(3) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a training event in which every person participating in the event -

(a) is in receipt of financial support provided by Sport Ireland under the scheme commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland International Carding Scheme,

(b) competes at a senior level and is a participant in a high performance training programme of the national governing body of the sport, which body receives, from Sport Ireland, financial support commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland High Performance Programme Funding,

(c) is a member of an inter-county team, at senior, under 20 or minor level, in a competition organised by the organisations commonly known and referred to as the Gaelic Athletic Association, the Ladies Gaelic Football Association or the Camogie Association,

(d) is a professional sportsperson who receives payment for training and playing sport under a contract of employment with a soccer club or the rugby football organisation commonly known and referred to as the Irish Rugby Football Union,

(e) is involved in the training and preparation of racehorses for events held under the authority of Horse Racing Ireland,

(f) is involved in the training and preparation of greyhounds for events held under the authority of Rásaíocht Con Éireann, or

(g) is a coach or trainer in respect of a person referred to in any of subparagraphs (a) to (f).

Carrying on or provision of certain businesses or services

11. (1) Subject to Regulation 19, a specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not permitted, or otherwise granted, access to a premises in a relevant geographical location where a relevant business or service is carried on or otherwise provided.

(2) For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph (1) does not prohibit -

(a) the filming or other recording of performances in a theatre, concert hall, museum or art gallery, without an audience present, for the purposes of broadcasting such performances on the internet, radio or television,

(b) the holding of horseracing or greyhound racing at a racecourse in accordance with these Regulations, or

(c) the use of a premises, or part of a premises, for the purposes of -

(i) a meeting of a local authority (within the meaning of the Act of 2001),

(ii) a meeting of a regional assembly (within the meaning of the Local Government Act 1991 (Regional Assemblies) (Establishment) Order 2014 ( S.I. No. 573 of 2014 )),

(iii) a sitting of one or both Houses of the Oireachtas or a committee thereof (within the meaning of section 2 of the Houses of the Oireachtas (Inquiries, Privileges and Procedures) Act 2013 (No. 33 of 2013)), or

(iv) a meeting of a political party registered in the Register of Political Parties (within the meaning of Part III of the Electoral Act 1992 (No. 23 of 1992)) or a meeting of a parliamentary party of such political party.

(3) (a) Subparagraph (b) applies notwithstanding anything contained in the Licensing Acts 1833 to 2018 or the Registration of Clubs Acts 1904 to 2008.

(b) A specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not, during the relevant period -

(i) permitted, or otherwise granted, access to relevant premises, or

(ii) permitted to remain on such premises,

except for the purpose of ordering, or collecting, or both, food or non-alcoholic beverages for consumption off such premises.

(c) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the period of 30 minutes referred to in section 7(1) and (2) of the Intoxicating Liquor Act 1962 (No. 21 of 1962), commonly referred to as drinking-up time, does not apply in relation to the relevant period.

(d) In the case of a relevant premises located in the County of Dublin, a specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not permitted or otherwise granted access to a relevant premises other than where (and without prejudice to the generality of subparagraph (b)(ii)) the intoxicating liquor being sold or supplied for consumption on the premises is -

(i) ordered by or on behalf of the member of the public being permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, at the same time as a substantial meal is so ordered, during the meal or after the meal has ended, and

(ii) consumed by that member during the meal or after the meal has ended.

(e) In this paragraph -

“relevant period”, in relation to a relevant premises to which, but for this paragraph, access by members of the public may be lawfully permitted, or otherwise granted, on and after 11.30 p.m. on a particular day, means the period -

(i) commencing at 11.30 p.m. on that day, and

(ii) ending at the later time on that day, or the later time on the next succeeding day, as the case may be, on and after which access by members of the public would no longer be lawful even if this Regulation had never been made;

“relevant premises” means a premises in a relevant geographical location (other than in a relevant county) where a business or service of a type specified in subparagraph (b) or (d) of paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 that is selling or supplying intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises and that, but for this Regulation, is otherwise permitted by law to do so, is lawfully carried on or otherwise provided.

(4) (a) A specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not, during the specified period -

(i) permitted, or otherwise granted, access to a specified premises, or

(ii) permitted to remain on a specified premises,

except for the purpose of ordering, or collecting, or both, food or non-alcoholic beverages for consumption off the specified premises.

(b) In this paragraph -

“specified period”, in relation to specified premises to which, but for this Regulation, access by members of the public may be lawfully permitted, or otherwise granted, on and after 11.30 p.m. on a particular day, means the period -

(a) commencing at 11.30 p.m. on that day, and

(b) ending at -

(i) subject to subparagraph (ii), the later time on that day, or the later time on the next succeeding day, as the case may be, on and after which access by members of the public would no longer be lawful even if this Regulation had never been made, or

(ii) 6.00 a.m. on the next succeeding day in any case where such first-mentioned access would extend beyond that time but for this Regulation;

“specified premises” means a premises in a relevant geographical location (other than in a relevant county) where -

(a) food or non-alcoholic beverages may be lawfully sold or supplied for consumption on such premises, or

(b) food or beverages may be lawfully sold or supplied for consumption on such premises but any beverage which is an intoxicating liquor may not be so consumed.

(5) Paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) are penal provisions for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(6) In this Regulation, “relevant business or service” means a business or service of a type specified in Schedule 2.

Other requirements in relation to certain premises referred to in Regulation 11

12. (1) Subject to Regulation 20, a specified person shall, in relation to a relevant premises within the meaning of Regulation 11(3) -

(a) in the case of a party of persons being permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, make a record of the time and date that the first member (in this Regulation referred to as a “lead person”) of the party of persons is permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises and the lead person’s name and telephone number,

(b) in the case of a member of the public (in this Regulation referred to as a “sole person”) who is not a member of a party of persons being permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, make a record of the time and date that the sole person is permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises and the sole person’s name and telephone number,

(c) in the case of a relevant premises located in the County of Dublin, make a record of the substantial meal or meals ordered, pursuant to Regulation 11(3)(d) by each member of a party of persons and each sole person permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, and

(d) not permit food or beverages to be served, or to continue to be served, to a member of a party of persons or a sole person permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises unless the food or beverages are consumed -

(i) in accordance with Regulation 11(3), and

(ii) whilst such member of a party of persons or sole person, as the case may be, is seated at a table.

(2) A specified person shall retain and make available records -

(a) in the case of records made under paragraph (1)(a), (b) and (c), for the purposes of inspection by a member of the Garda Síochána acting in the course of his or her duties under these Regulations, for a period of 28 days after the records have been made, and

(b) in the case of records made under paragraph (1)(a) and (b), for the purposes of inspection by a person appointed by the Health Service Executive for the purposes of the programme commonly known as the Covid-19 Contact Management Programme, for a period of 28 days after the records have been made.

(3) (a) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), a specified person may request a lead person to provide the specified person with the lead person’s name and telephone number and, where that specified person does so, the lead person shall comply with that request.

(b) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), a specified person may request a sole person to provide the specified person with the sole person’s name and telephone number and, where that specified person does so, the sole person shall comply with that request.

(4) Paragraphs (1) and (2) are penal provisions for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(5) In this Regulation, “party of persons” means, in relation to a relevant premises within the meaning of Regulation 11(3), a group of 2 or more members of the public who intend to consume food or beverages together in the premises and who wish to be permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises for that purpose, whether or not each member arrives at the premises at the same time.

Part 3

Temporary restrictions - relevant counties

Restrictions of movement of relevant persons in relation to travel from relevant county

13. (1) Subject to paragraph (2), a relevant person shall not travel from his or her county of residence to another county or to a state other than the State without reasonable excuse.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of what constitutes a reasonable excuse for the purposes of paragraph (1), a reasonable excuse for travelling includes travelling in order to -

(a) work, comply with a contract of employment or contract for services, or otherwise engage in work or employment where –

(i) such work, compliance, or engagement relates to an essential retail outlet or an essential service, and

(ii) in all the circumstances, it is not practicable to so work, comply or engage in the person’s place of residence,

(b) without prejudice to the generality of subparagraph (a) -

(i) provide services to, or perform the functions of, an office holder appointed under any enactment or under the Constitution, or a member of either House of the Oireachtas, the European Parliament or a local authority, or

(ii) provide services essential to the functioning of diplomatic missions and consular posts in the State,

(c) farm, carry out agricultural activities, or assist in farming or carrying out agricultural activities,

(d) attend, for educational reasons -

(i) a primary or secondary school, or

(ii) a university, higher education institution or other education and training facility to the extent that it is necessary for such educational reasons to attend in person,

(e) accompany to a school referred to in subparagraph (d)(i), or to a university, higher education institution or other education and training facility referred to in subparagraph (d)(ii), any other person residing with the person, or a vulnerable person,

(f) access créche or other childcare facilities,

(g) attend a medical or dental appointment, or accompany, to such an appointment, any other person residing with the person, or a vulnerable person,

(h) seek essential medical, health or dental assistance for the person, for any other person residing with the person, or for a vulnerable person,

(i) donate blood or accompany any other person residing with the person to donate blood,

(j) seek veterinary assistance,

(k) attend to vital family matters (including providing care to vulnerable persons),

(l) attend a funeral,

(m) fulfil a legal obligation (including attending court, satisfying bail conditions, or participating in ongoing legal proceedings), attend a court office where required, initiate emergency legal proceedings or execute essential legal documents,

(n) if the person is a parent or guardian of a child, or a person having a right of access to a child, give effect to arrangements for access to the child by -

(i) the person, or

(ii) another person who is -

(I) a parent or guardian of the child, or

(II) a person having a right of access to the child,

(o) in the case of a minister of religion or priest (or any equivalent thereof in any religion) -

(i) lead worship or services remotely through the use of information and communications technology,

(ii) minister to the sick, or

(iii) conduct funeral or wedding services,

(p) move to another residence where, in all the circumstances of the case, such movement is reasonably necessary,

(q) return to the person’s place of residence,

(r) where the person is not ordinarily resident in the State, leave the State,

(s) provide emergency assistance, avoid injury or illness, or escape a risk of harm, whether to the person or to another person,

(t) go to an essential retail outlet for the purpose of obtaining items (including food, beverages, fuel, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, essential items for the health and welfare of animals, or supplies for the essential upkeep and functioning of the person’s place of residence), or accessing services provided in the outlet, for the applicable person or any other person residing in the person’s place of residence, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence,

(u) go to an essential retail outlet for the purpose of obtaining items (including food, beverages, fuel, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, essential items for the health and welfare of animals, or supplies for the essential upkeep and functioning of the place of residence of a vulnerable person), or accessing services provided in the outlet, for a vulnerable person, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence, or

(v) access an essential service, or assist any other person residing in the person’s place of residence, or a vulnerable person, to access an essential service, where the access is immediately required and the person, other person residing in the relevant residence or vulnerable person, as the case may be, cannot access the service concerned from the place of residence, insofar as it is not reasonably practicable to do so within the person’s county of residence.

Restrictions on events in private dwellings

14. (1) A person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, an event to be held in a private dwelling in a relevant county other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) Subject to paragraph (3), a person may organise, or cause to be organised, an event to be held in a private dwelling in a relevant county for social or recreational reasons where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the persons attending, or proposed to attend, the event (for whatever reason) reside in the private dwelling.

(3) For the purposes of paragraph (2), where the event is attended by -

(a) a child, and

(b) a parent or guardian of such child, who does not ordinarily reside with that child,

the parent or guardian, as the case may be, and the child shall be deemed to reside in the private dwelling.

Restrictions on certain events and funerals

15. (1) A person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a relevant event in a relevant county other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise a relevant event in a relevant county where -

(a) the event takes place only outdoors and,

(b) the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the event is attended, or proposed to be attended, by no more than 15 persons.

(3) A person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a funeral to be held in a relevant county other than where the number of people, excluding a minister of religion or priest (or any equivalent thereof in any religion), attending the funeral does not exceed 25.

(4) Paragraph (1) is a penal provision for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(5) For the purposes of this Regulation, in reckoning the number of persons attending a relevant event, no account shall be taken of persons so attending in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services.

Wedding Receptions

16. (1) A person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a wedding reception in a relevant county other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise, or cause to be organised, a wedding reception in a relevant county in a premises other than a private dwelling where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the maximum number of persons attending, or proposed to attend, the wedding reception does not exceed 6 persons.

(3) For the purposes of this Regulation, in reckoning the number of persons attending a wedding reception, no account shall be taken of –

(a) the persons getting married, or

(b) persons so attending in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services.

Restrictions on sporting events

17. (1) Subject to paragraph (2), a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a sporting event in a relevant county.

(2) A person may organise, or cause to be organised, a sporting event in a relevant county where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that -

(a) the event is attended, or proposed to be attended, only by necessary persons, and

(b) every person participating in the event -

(i) is in receipt of financial support provided by Sport Ireland under the scheme commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland International Carding Scheme,

(ii) competes at a senior level and is a participant in a high performance training programme of the national governing body of the sport, which body receives, from Sport Ireland, financial support commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland High Performance Programme Funding,

(iii) is a member of an inter-county team, at senior, under 20 or minor level, in a competition organised by the organisations commonly known and referred to as the Gaelic Athletic Association, the Ladies Gaelic Football Association or the Camogie Association,

(iv) is a professional sportsperson who receives payment for training and playing sport under a contract of employment with a soccer club or the rugby football organisation commonly known and referred to as the Irish Rugby Football Union,

(v) is involved in the training and preparation of racehorses for events held under the authority of Horse Racing Ireland, or

(vi) is involved in the training and preparation of greyhounds for events held under the authority of Rásaíocht Con Éireann.

Restrictions on training events

18. (1) Subject to paragraph (3), a person shall not organise, or cause to be organised, a training event in a relevant county other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A person may organise a training event in a relevant county where the person takes all reasonable steps to ensure that -

(a) other persons attending at, or otherwise participating in, the training event are organised into groups of no more than 15 persons,

(b) a group referred to in subparagraph (a), and any person forming part of such a group, is not permitted to commingle, associate with, or otherwise come into physical contact with, another such group or any other person forming part of such other group, and

(c) the training event is held outdoors.

(3) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a training event in which every person participating in the event -

(a) is in receipt of financial support provided by Sport Ireland under the scheme commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland International Carding Scheme,

(b) competes at a senior level and is a participant in a high performance training programme of the national governing body of the sport, which body receives, from Sport Ireland, financial support commonly known and referred to as the Sport Ireland High Performance Programme Funding,

(c) is a member of an inter-county team, at senior, under 20 or minor level, in a competition organised by the organisations commonly known and referred to as the Gaelic Athletic Association, the Ladies Gaelic Football Association or the Camogie Association,

(d) is a professional sportsperson who receives payment for training and playing sport under a contract of employment with a soccer club or the rugby football organisation commonly known and referred to as the Irish Rugby Football Union,

(e) is involved in the training and preparation of racehorses for events held under the authority of Horse Racing Ireland,

(f) is involved in the training and preparation of greyhounds for events held under the authority of Rásaíocht Con Éireann, or

(g) is a coach or trainer in respect of a person referred to in any of subparagraphs (a) to (f).

Carrying on or provision of certain businesses or services

19. (1) A specified person shall ensure that members of the public and workers are not permitted, or otherwise granted, access to a premises -

(a) in or at which a business or service is carried out, and

(b) that is in a relevant county,

other than in accordance with paragraph (2).

(2) A specified person may permit, or otherwise grant, access to a premises in a relevant county to –

(a) a worker, where access to the premises by the worker is necessary to the provision of an essential service or the operation of an essential retail outlet, or

(b) members of the public -

(i) where the premises is an essential retail outlet, provided that such access is granted, or otherwise permitted, only to such part of the premises as is an essential retail outlet,

(ii) where the premises is used to provide an essential service, provided that such access is granted, or otherwise permitted, only to such part of the premises as is used to provide the essential service,

(iii) where the premises is a relevant premises, insofar as access is granted, or otherwise permitted, in accordance with paragraph (4), and

(iv) where the premises is a specified premises, insofar as access is granted, or otherwise permitted, in accordance with paragraph (5).

(3) For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph (1) does not prohibit –

(a) the filming or other recording of performances in a theatre, concert hall, museum or art gallery, without an audience present, for the purposes of broadcasting such performances on the internet, radio or television,

(b) the holding of horseracing or greyhound racing at a racecourse in accordance with these Regulations, or

(c) the use of a premises for the purposes of -

(i) a meeting of a local authority (within the meaning of the Act of 2001),

(ii) a meeting of a regional assembly (within the meaning of the Local Government Act 1991 (Regional Assemblies) (Establishment) Order 2014 ( S.I. No. 573 of 2014 )),

(iii) a sitting of one or both Houses of the Oireachtas or a committee thereof (within the meaning of section 2 of the Houses of the Oireachtas (Inquiries, Privileges and Procedures) Act 2013 (No. 33 of 2013)), or

(iv) a meeting of a political party registered in the Register of Political Parties (within the meaning of Part III of the Electoral Act 1992 (No. 23 of 1992)) or a meeting of a parliamentary party of such political party.

(4) (a) Subparagraph (b) applies notwithstanding anything contained in the Licensing Acts 1833 to 2018 or the Registration of Clubs Acts 1904 to 2008.

(b) A specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not, during the relevant period -

(i) permitted, or otherwise granted, access to relevant premises, or

(ii) permitted to remain on such premises,

except for the purpose of ordering, or collecting, or both, food or non-alcoholic beverages for consumption off such premises.

(c) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the period of 30 minutes referred to in section 7(1) and (2) of the Intoxicating Liquor Act 1962 (No. 21 of 1962), commonly referred to as drinking-up time, does not apply in relation to the relevant period.

(d) In this paragraph, “relevant period”, in relation to a relevant premises to which, but for this paragraph, access by members of the public may be lawfully permitted, or otherwise granted, on and after 11.30 p.m. on a particular day, means the period -

(i) commencing at 11.30 p.m. on that day, and

(ii) ending at the later time on that day, or the later time on the next succeeding day, as the case may be, on and after which access by members of the public would no longer be lawful even if this Regulation had never been made.

(5) (a) A specified person shall ensure that members of the public are not, during the specified period -

(i) permitted, or otherwise granted, access to a specified premises, or

(ii) permitted to remain on a specified premises,

except for the purpose of ordering, or collecting, or both, food or non-alcoholic beverages for consumption off the specified premises.

(b) In this paragraph, “specified period”, in relation to specified premises to which, but for this Regulation, access by members of the public may be lawfully permitted, or otherwise granted, on and after 11.30 p.m. on a particular day, means the period -

(i) commencing at 11.30 p.m. on that day, and

(ii) ending at -

(I) subject to subparagraph (ii), the later time on that day, or the later time on the next succeeding day, as the case may be, on and after which access by members of the public would no longer be lawful even if this Regulation had never been made, or

(II) 6.00 a.m. on the next succeeding day in any case where such first-mentioned access would extend beyond that time but for this Regulation.

(6) Paragraphs (1), (4) and (5) are penal provisions for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(7) In this Regulation -

“relevant premises” means a premises in a relevant county where a business or service of a type specified in subparagraph (b) or (d) of paragraph 18 of Part 1 of Schedule 3 that is selling or supplying intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises and that, but for this Regulation, is otherwise permitted by law to do so, is lawfully carried on or otherwise provided;

“specified premises” means a premises in a relevant county where -

(a) food or non-alcoholic beverages may be lawfully sold or supplied for consumption on such premises, or

(b) food or beverages may be lawfully sold or supplied for consumption on such premises but any beverage which is an intoxicating liquor may not be so consumed.

“worker” means, in relation to a premises that is a place of work -

(a) an employee working at the premises,

(b) a member of staff at the premises, or

(c) a person providing professional services to or at the premises.

Other requirements in relation to certain premises referred to in Regulation 19

20. (1) A specified person shall, in relation to a relevant premises within the meaning of Regulation 19 -

(a) in the case of a party of persons being permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, make a record of the time and date that the first member (in this Regulation referred to as a “lead person”) of the party of persons is permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises and the lead person’s name and telephone number,

(b) in the case of a member of the public (in this Regulation referred to as a “sole person”) who is not a member of a party of persons being permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises, make a record of the time and date that the sole person is permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises and the sole person’s name and telephone number, and

(c) not permit food or beverages to be served, or to continue to be served, to a member of a party of persons or a sole person permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises unless the food or beverages are consumed whilst such member of a party of persons or sole person, as the case may be, is seated at a table.

(2) A specified person shall retain and make available records made under paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) for the purposes of inspection -

(a) by a member of the Garda Síochána acting in the course of his or her duties under these Regulations, for a period of 28 days after the records have been made, and

(b) by a person appointed by the Health Service Executive for the purposes of the programme commonly known as the Covid-19 Contact Management Programme, for a period of 28 days after the records have been made.

(3) (a) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), a specified person may request a lead person to provide the specified person with the lead person’s name and telephone number and, where that specified person does so, the lead person shall comply with that request.

(b) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), a specified person may request a sole person to provide the specified person with the sole person’s name and telephone number and, where that specified person does so, the sole person shall comply with that request.

(4) Paragraphs (1) and (2) are penal provisions for the purposes of section 31A of the Act of 1947.

(5) In this Regulation, “party of persons” means, in relation to a relevant premises within the meaning of Regulation 19(3), a group of 2 or more members of the public who intend to consume food or beverages together in the premises and who wish to be permitted, or otherwise granted, access to the premises for that purpose, whether or not each member arrives at the premises at the same time.

Part 4

Data Protection

Data Protection

21. (1) Personal data collected for the purposes of these Regulations may be processed by -

(a) a specified person for the purposes of -

(i) complying with the requirements of these Regulations, or

(ii) providing information to the Health Service Executive for the purposes referred to in paragraph (b),

(b) the Health Service Executive for the purposes of the identification, tracing and contacting of persons who have been in contact with persons who have been diagnosed, or suspected of having been infected, with Covid-19, and

(c) a member of the Garda Síochána for the purposes of -

(i) monitoring compliance by a specified person with, or

(ii) enforcement of,

these Regulations.

(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, a specified person, the Health Service Executive and the Garda Síochána are designated as data controllers in relation to personal data respectively processed by them pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) Subject to paragraph (4), personal data collected for the purposes of these Regulations shall be permanently deleted no later than 28 days after the records referred to in Regulation 12 or 20 have been collected under paragraph (1) of Regulation 12 or 20, as the case may be.

(4) Where personal data collected in accordance with these Regulations are required for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of a criminal offence, the data -

(a) may be processed for as long as they are required for such prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution, and

(b) shall be permanently deleted after they are no longer required for such prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution.

(5) In this Regulation -

“General Data Protection Regulation” means Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 20161 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation);

“personal data” has the meaning it has in the General Data Protection Regulation;

“processing”, in relation to personal data, has the meaning it has in the General Data Protection Regulation.

SCHEDULE 1

Regulation 4

Relevant Counties

1. The County of Cavan

2. The County of Donegal

3. The County of Monaghan

SCHEDULE 2

Regulation 11

Relevant businesses or services

1. Cinemas, other than outdoor cinemas at which persons attending a screening do so in motor vehicles and remain in the vehicles without exiting the motor vehicles for the duration of such attendance.

2. Theatres and concert halls.

3. Museums.

4. Art galleries, other than privately-owned art galleries offering artworks for sale.

5. Circuses.

6. Nightclubs and discotheques, including those licenced under the Public Dance Halls Act 1935 (No. 2 of 1935).

7. Bingo halls.

8. Private Members’ Clubs (howsoever described) where gaming (within the meaning of the Gaming and Lotteries Act 1956 (No. 2 of 1956)) is carried on exclusively amongst members of the Private Members’ Club and is the primary purpose of such Private Members’ Club.

9. Ice skating rinks.

10. Roller skating rinks.

11. Aquariums.

12. Indoor leisure facilities, including bowling alleys, amusement arcades, dance studios, soft play areas and other indoor children’s play areas, other than insofar as they provide gymnasium facilities for use by persons taking exercise on an individual basis.

13. Funfairs, including funfairs within the meaning of the Gaming and Lotteries Act 1956 (No. 2 of 1956).

14. Amusement halls licensed in accordance with the Gaming and Lotteries Act 1956 (No. 2 of 1956).

15. Amusement parks and theme parks.

16. Outlets selling food or beverages whether on a retail or wholesale basis and whether in a non-specialised or specialised outlet, other than -

(a) insofar as they sell food or beverages on a takeaway basis or for consumption off the premises,

(b) insofar as they sell food or beverages for consumption in an area of part of the premises the entirety of which is situated outdoors and which holds no more than 15 people (not including persons engaging in such sale in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services) at any one time,

(c) staff canteens operating for the exclusive use of persons working in, or at, a particular premises, or

(d) hotels or similar accommodation services insofar as they sell food or beverages for consumption on the premises by residents of the service.

17. Sports stadiums, campuses and sports training facilities other than insofar as -

(a) they are available free of charge for informal and recreational use by members of the public, or

(b) their operation is necessary for -

(i) sporting events in accordance with Regulation 9, or

(ii) training events in accordance with Regulation 10.

SCHEDULE 3

Regulation 19

Part 1

Essential Retail Outlets

1. Outlets selling food or beverages on a takeaway basis, or newspapers, whether on a retail or wholesale basis and whether in a non-specialised or specialised outlet.

2. Markets that, wholly or principally, offer food for sale.

3. Outlets selling products necessary for the essential upkeep and functioning of places of residence and businesses, whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

4. Pharmacies, chemists and retailers or wholesalers providing pharmaceuticals or pharmaceutical or dispensing services, whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

5. Outlets selling health, medical or orthopaedic goods in a specialised outlet, whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

6. Fuel service stations and heating fuel providers.

7. Outlets selling essential items for the health and welfare of animals (including animal feed and veterinary medicinal products, pet food, animal bedding and animal supplies), whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

8. Laundries and drycleaners.

9. Banks, post offices and credit unions.

10. Outlets selling safety supplies (including work-wear apparel, footwear and personal protective equipment), whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

11. Hardware outlets, builders’ merchants and outlets that provide, whether on a retail or wholesale basis -

(a) hardware products necessary for home and business maintenance or construction and development,

(b) sanitation and farm equipment, or

(c) supplies and tools essential for gardening, farming or agriculture purposes.

12. Optician and optometrist outlets.

13. Outlets providing hearing test services or selling hearing aids and appliances.

14. Outlets providing for the sale, supply, repair and maintenance of mechanically propelled vehicles or for the repair of bicycles and any related facilities (including tyre sales and repairs).

15. Outlets selling office products and services for businesses or for relevant persons working from their respective places of residence, whether on a retail or wholesale basis.

16. Outlets providing electrical, information and communications technology and telephone sales, repair and maintenance services for places of residence and businesses.

17. Any other retail outlet that operates an online or other remote system of ordering goods for purposes of collection at the retail outlet.

18. Outlets selling food or beverages whether on a retail or wholesale basis and whether in a non-specialised or specialised outlet -

(a) insofar as they sell food or beverages on a takeaway basis or for consumption off the premises,

(b) insofar as they sell food or beverages for consumption in an area of part of the premises the entirety of which is situated outdoors and which holds no more than 15 people (not including persons engaging in such sale in a professional capacity, in the course of their employment, or in fulfilment of a contract for services) at any one time,

(c) insofar as they are staff canteens operating for the exclusive use of persons working in, or at, a particular premises, or

(d) subject to paragraph 8 of Part 2, hotels or similar accommodation services insofar as they sell food or beverages for consumption on the premises by residents of the service.

Part 2

Essential Services

Agriculture, horticulture, forestry, fishing, animal welfare and related services

1. The following services relating to agriculture, horticulture, forestry, fishing, animal welfare and related services:

(a) farming;

(b) farm labour;

(c) farm relief services;

(d) crop and animal production;

(e) fishing for commercial purposes;

(f) aquaculture and fish farming;

(g) horticulture;

(h) forestry;

(i) veterinary, animal welfare and related services;

(j) marts held online only;

(k) the provision of support services relating to any of the services specified in subparagraphs (a) to (j) (including artificial insemination and animal disposal).

Manufacturing

2. The following services relating to manufacturing:

(a) the manufacture, production or processing of food and beverage products;

(b) the manufacture, production or processing of animal feeds;

(c) the manufacture of work-wear apparel, personal protective equipment or footwear;

(d) the manufacture of wood pulp, paper and paperboard;

(e) the operation of sawmills and the processing of wood and cork;

(f) the printing and reproduction of newspapers and other media services;

(g) the distillation of coke and refined petroleum products;

(h) the refining of alumina;

(i) the manufacture of chemicals and chemical products;

(j) the manufacture of pharmaceutical products and preparations;

(k) the manufacture of products necessary for the supply chain of essential services;

(l) the manufacture of products necessary for national and international supply chains, other than such supply chains referred to in subparagraph (k);

(m) the manufacture of computers, electronic and optical products (including semi-conductors);

(n) the manufacture of electrical equipment, machinery and other equipment (including agricultural and forestry machinery);

(o) the manufacture of medical devices or appliances;

(p) the manufacture of medicinal, health, dental and other personal hygiene products, equipment, appliances and supplies.

Supply, repair and installation of machinery and equipment

3. The following services relating to the supply, repair and installation of machinery and equipment:

(a) the supply, repair and installation of machinery and equipment (including mechanically propelled vehicles, industrial machinery and equipment) for essential services;

(b) the repair of mechanically propelled vehicles or the repair of bicycles and related facilities.

Electricity, gas, water, sewage and waste management

4. The following services relating to electricity, gas, water, sewage and waste management:

(a) the generation, transmission, supply and distribution of electric power;

(b) the extraction and distribution of gas;

(c) the collection, treatment and supply of water;

(d) the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage or wastewater;

(e) the collection of waste, remediation activities and other waste management treatment and disposal activities (including the operation of landfill sites, waste transfer stations, waste processing centres and recycling facilities or waste recovery).

Construction and development

5. The following services relating to construction and development:

(a) construction or development work and the provision of support services relating to construction and development work;

(b) the repair, maintenance and construction of road, rail and utility infrastructure;

(c) the supply and delivery of maintenance and repair services to businesses and places of residence (including electrical, gas, plumbing, glazing and roofing services).

Wholesale and retail trade

6. The following services relating to wholesale and retail trade:

(a) the operation of essential retail outlets;

(b) wholesale and distribution services necessary for ensuring the availability for sale of food, beverages, fuel, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, essential items for the health and welfare of animals, or supplies for the essential upkeep and functioning of a place of residence;

(c) the operation of automated teller machines and related services.

Transport, storage and communications

7. The following services relating to transport, storage and communications:

(a) the provision of land transport, including bus, rail and taxi services;

(b) road, rail, sea and air freight;

(c) the provision of sea and air passenger services;

(d) the operation of ports, harbours and airports;

(e) the operation of lighthouses;

(f) warehousing and support activities (including cargo-handling, postal and courier activities) for the transportation of goods;

(g) the control and critical maintenance of the transport infrastructure network (including roads);

(h) any service required for the safe provision of a service specified in subparagraphs (a) to (g).

Accommodation and food services

8. The following services relating to accommodation and food services provision:

(a) hotel or similar accommodation services to persons who are guests of those hotels or similar accommodation on the 18th day of October 2020 until the date of their departure;

(b) hotel or similar accommodation services to guests travelling for purposes other than social, recreational, cultural or tourist purposes;

(c) the operation of hotels or similar accommodation services providing essential accommodation (including accommodation for homeless persons and persons in direct provision, persons who are unable to reside in their usual place of residence due to reasons related to the spread of Covid-19 or otherwise) and related services;

(d) food and beverage service activities for supply to a business engaged in an essential service;

(e) the provision of food or beverage takeaway or delivery services or seated outdoor service with a maximum capacity of 15 persons.

Information and communications

9. The following services relating to information and communications:

(a) the production and publication of newspapers, journals and periodicals and the distribution of those publications, whether in hardcopy or digital format;

(b) the production of television and radio programmes, video, sound, digital or other electronic content and the broadcast or publication of the same to the public or a portion of the public;

(c) the provision of services necessary to deliver and support wired telecommunication activities and satellite telecommunication activities and other communications activities (including internet and cloud providers);

(d) the provision of data centre services and related services.

Financial and legal activities

10. The following services relating to financial and legal activities:

(a) financial, insurance and banking services (including post office and credit union services) provided by a financial services provider;

(b) accounting services or audit services;

(c) legal services provided by practising barristers or practising solicitors.

Professional, scientific and technical activities

11. The following services relating to professional, scientific and technical activities:

(a) the provision of engineering, technical testing activities and analysis (including the performance of physical, chemical and other analytical testing of materials and products);

(b) the provision of scientific research and development services;

(c) regulation, inspection and certification services, in accordance with law, of a particular sector by a body created by statute for that purpose.

Rental and leasing activities

12. The provision of a service for the rental or leasing of mechanically propelled vehicles or bicycles.

Administrative and support activities

13. The following services relating to administrative and support activities:

(a) payroll and payment services necessary for the operation of undertakings and bodies;

(b) employment placement and human resources services associated with the recruitment and deployment of workers engaged in the provision of essential services;

(c) data processing, website hosting and related activities;

(d) security activities to assist in either or both of the following:

(i) the delivery of essential services;

(ii) the securing of premises closed to the public;

(e) funeral, burial and related services;

(f) business support services (including information and communications technology support and sales, repair and maintenance for information and communications technology and telephones) where such services are necessary to support -

(i) any other essential service,

(ii) a person working from their place of residence where the business concerned is being operated from a place of residence, or

(iii) a business that is not an essential service, to the extent required to maintain that business in operation or to minimise any delay in the business resuming operation after these Regulations have ceased to be in operation;

(g) where such services are necessary to support any other essential service:

(i) the cleaning of buildings;

(ii) industrial cleaning activities;

(iii) the provision of key third party supports other than those referred to in paragraph (f) provided under contract to a person providing an essential service.

Public administration, emergency services and defence

14. The following services relating to public administration, emergency services and defence:

(a) the performance by the Garda Síochána, including members and civilian staff of the Garda Síochána, of its functions under the Garda Síochána Act 2005 (No. 20 of 2005);

(b) public order, rescue and emergency services (including fire, coastguard, lifeboat, mountain rescue and ambulance services);

(c) the performance by the Defence Forces of the functions conferred on them by or under any enactment;

(d) emergency call answering services;

(e) services to enable the administration of justice;

(f) prison services and child detention services (including all onsite activities);

(g) cyber-security services;

(h) the provision of social protection benefits;

(i) regulatory processes and certification required to ensure supply chains, safety of food, beverages, medicinal products, medical devices or appliances, other medical or health supplies or products, and general process safety;

(j) the operation and maintenance of botanical gardens, parks, forests, nature reserves and playgrounds;

(k) services relating to the deaths and funerals of persons;

(l) chaplaincy services;

(m) services provided or functions performed by an office holder appointed under any enactment or under the Constitution, or members of either House of the Oireachtas, the European Parliament or a local authority;

(n) services provided under the Child Care Act 1991 (No. 17 of 1991);

(o) adoption services under the Adoption Act 2010 (No. 21 of 2010);

(p) services provided to victims;

(q) services, including regulation services, provided by, and activities of, the Central Bank of Ireland, the Investor Compensation Company DAC (otherwise known as the Investor Compensation Company Limited) and the National Treasury Management Agency;

(r) any other service provided, or function performed, by a public body (within the meaning of the Data Sharing and Governance Act 2019 (No. 5 of 2019)), where the provision of the service or performance of the function is necessary to support or manage -

(i) other essential services, or

(ii) the response of the State to the spread of Covid-19;

(s) Driver Testing Services provided by the Road Safety Authority for the purposes of section 33 of the Road Traffic Act 1961 (No. 24 of 1961) for people involved in the provision of essential services or essential retail outlets;

(t) Driving instruction provided by instructors on the Register of Approved Diving instructors, established under Part 3 of the Road Traffic (Driving Instructor Licensing) (No.2) Regulations 2009 ( S.I. No. 203 of 2009 ), where the person receiving instruction has a booking reserved to undergo a test for the purposes of section 33 of the Road Traffic Act 1961 (No. 24 of 1961).

Human health and social work activities

15. The following services relating to human health and social work activities:

(a) hospital services;

(b) therapy services provided by a member of a designated profession within the meaning of section 3 of the Health and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 (No. 27 of 2005);

(c) services relating to public health, including services relating to -

(i) the identification, tracing and contacting of persons who have been in contact with persons who have been diagnosed, or are suspected of having been infected, with Covid-19, and

(ii) the testing of persons for Covid-19;

(d) laboratory services;

(e) drug treatment and addiction services;

(f) hospice services;

(g) pharmacy services;

(h) primary care and general and specialist medical practice activities;

(i) dental services;

(j) blood donation and related services;

(k) tissue or organ donation and related services;

(l) residential care services (including nursing care, mental health and substance abuse services, services for elderly persons and persons with disabilities) and children’s residential services;

(m) homecare, home help and other health services in the community;

(n) social work and social care services, (including disability services, mental health services, child protection and welfare services, domestic, sexual and gender-based violence services) and homeless services including homeless outreach services;

(o) paramedical, ambulance and pre-hospital care services;

(p) services provided by minor injury units;

(q) maternity services;

(r) health and social work services;

(s) food safety and environmental services;

(t) regulated childcare services and the care of children for persons providing essential services.

Education

16. The following services relating to education activities:

(a) primary and post primary school;

(b) higher and further education, insofar as onsite presence is required and such education activities cannot be held remotely.

Community and voluntary services

17. The following services relating to community and voluntary services:

(a) services not otherwise specified in this Schedule, provided by community and voluntary workers, as part of a publicly commissioned service, deployed to assist in the delivery of essential services;

(b) volunteer services operating under the local authority emergency management framework in accordance with public health guidance.

Diplomatic missions and consular affairs

18. The provision of services essential to the functioning of diplomatic missions and consular posts in the State.

/images/ls

GIVEN under my Official Seal,

17 October, 2020.

STEPHEN DONNELLY,

Minister for Health.