CRIMINAL JUSTICE (ENFORCEMENT POWERS) (COVID-19) ACT 2020

CONTENTS

Section

1. Interpretation

2. Application of Act

3. Entry, inspection, etc., of relevant premises by member

4. Immediate closure order for failure or refusal to comply with direction

5. Application for emergency closure order for failure or refusal to comply with more than one direction

6. Compliance notice

7. Application to District Court for temporary closure order for failure or refusal to comply with compliance notice

8. Emergency closure order and temporary closure order: applicable provisions

9. Appeal against compliance notice

10. Appeal against temporary closure order

11. Grounds for objection to renewal of licences

12. Grounds for objection to renewal of certificates under Act of 1904

13. Amendment of section 31A of Health Act 1947

14. Liability for offences by bodies corporate

15. Exercise of jurisdiction by District Court and Circuit Court

16. Service of documents

17. Short title and operation

Acts Referred to

Courts (No. 2) Act 1986 (No. 26)

Health Act 1947 (No. 28)

Legal Services Regulation Act 2015 (No. 65)

Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act 1904 (4 Edw. 7, c. 9

Registration of Clubs Acts 1904 to 2008

/static/images/base/harp.jpg

Number 14 of 2020

CRIMINAL JUSTICE (ENFORCEMENT POWERS) (COVID-19) ACT 2020

An Act to make exceptional provision, in the public interest and having regard to the manifest and grave risk to human life and public health posed by the spread of the disease known as Covid-19 and in order to mitigate, where practicable, the effect of the spread of that disease, to provide for additional enforcement measures in respect of certain premises where intoxicating liquor is sold or supplied for consumption on the premises to ensure compliance with certain requirements, imposed by or under the Health Act 1947 , breaches of which constitute criminal offences; to provide for additional bases for objection on the ground of good character to renewal of licences for certain premises; to provide for additional bases for objection on the ground of character to renewal of certificates of registration for clubs; to amend the Health Act 1947; and to provide for related matters.

[11th September, 2020]

WHEREAS an emergency has arisen and continues in the State by virtue of the spread of the disease known as Covid-19;

AND WHEREAS the State is and its citizens are, in significant respects, highly exposed to the effect of the spread of that disease;

AND WHEREAS the State, having regard to the need to preserve and protect public health, has introduced a range of extraordinary measures and safeguards to prevent, minimise, limit or reduce the risk of persons being infected with that disease;

AND WHEREAS the emergency that has arisen and continues is of such a character that it is necessary for compelling reasons of public interest and for the common good to provide in this Act for additional powers of enforcement of certain of those extraordinary measures and safeguards in relation to certain premises where intoxicating liquor is sold or supplied for consumption on the premises;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for those additional powers of enforcement in relation to such premises in order to assist and support the State’s efforts to promote and maintain the normal functioning of society, to protect the gradual re-opening of

society and, to the greatest extent possible, to avoid the imposition or re-imposition of restrictions thereon.

Be it enacted by the Oireachtas as follows: